
# Developing A Server

*Server*s are the classes of the server instances used during a light show's lifetime. They can implement their logic any way they like, but by default can take advantage of [ddf's minim library](https://github.com/ddf/Minim).

## Requirements

1. A server can not have a name colliding with any of the classes declared in files in the _Lightshow_ directory. Not abiding to this will stop the server from being importable by users.
2. A server has to conform to _Live Lightshow_'s `Server` interface, which requires implementing:
	* `void processFrame(AudioBuffer buffer, FFT fft)`
	* a constructor with the signature `(Configuration configuration, Arduino arduino)`
The constructor-requirement is not enforced by the compiler, but will lead to a runtime-crash if ignored.
3. A server has to tag itself with `// #server "<user-facing identifier>"` right above its class declaration. Leaving out this tag will cause _Live Lightshow_ to ignore the server during static indexing, and therefore make it unusable for users. The `<user-facing identifier>` is the default name, by which a user can refer to the server.

## Basic Implementation

The starting point of a server is its `processFrame`-method. This method is called periodically with the `buffer` holding the audio-samples for the current chuck (typically 1024 samples), and the `fft` holding a Fourier-transformed version of the chunk (`fft` does not need to be forwarded again in `processFrame`). A server also holds a reference to an `Arduino` object received during initialization. It can be used to make calls to the _Arduino_ via the [_Arduino_ for _Processing_ library](https://playground.arduino.cc/Interfacing/Processing/).
With this setup a server can use the information from `buffer` and `fft` to cause decide how to affect the _Arduino_. If one chunk is not enough information, a server could also save a history of samples. The server's class should optimally contain all of the properties required for it to run.

## User-Facing Properties

Sometimes certain properties are hardcoded values, and changing them would simply lead to different but equally valid behaviour of a server. In this case it is useful to expose such a property for the user to customize. User-facing properties of a server are called _traits_ and are declared with a special sytax inside the body of a server's class:

```java
// #trait "<user-facing trait identifier>": <default trait value>
```

The `<user-facing trait identifier>` is the name of the trait, as will be displayed to the user. No two traits in a server can be have the same identifier. The trait identifier also serves as the server-internal identifier for accessing the trait - via the instance's `configuration` object. The `configuration` object is the interface between a server instance, and its user-editable runtime configuration file. Every trait-declaration in a server is used during _Live Lightshow_'s indexing process to create the static and therefore runtime configuration files. The values can be accessed via `Configuration`'s `valueForTrait` method, which takes the `<user-facing trait identifier>` as argument to figure out which trait's value to return. The return type is just `Object` and needs to be cast to a trait's value's type individually. A trait's value's type is determined by form of the given `<default trait value>`. It can have the following types:
* `int` with default values like `0`, `42`, or `-10`
* `float` with default values like `0.0`, `3.14` or `-10.0`
* `bool`	with default values `true` or `false`
* `int-list` with default values like `[0, 42, -10]`, `[5]` or `i[]` for the empty list
*  `float-list` with default values like `[0.0, 3.14, -10.0]`, `[0.5]` or `f[]` for the empty list
* `bool-list` with default values like`[true, false, false]`, `[true]` or `b[]` for the list

The primitive types are returned as `Integer`, `Float` and `Bool` and the list-types are returned as `List<Type>` by `valueForTrait`.
If a given default value does not match one of these types, its trait will be ignored during indexing.

As calling `configuration.valueForTrait("long identifier name")` and casting it to the right type every time you want to use a user-facing property can be quite unpleasant, it can be useful to use the following pattern:

```java
// #trait "Example Trait": [1, 2, 3]
private List<Integer> exampleTrait() { return (List<Integer>) configuration.valueForTrait("Example Trait"); }
```

This way the call-site for `Example Trait` is simply `exampleTrait()`, and its identifier only has to be used once, leading to less typos in the identifier when calling `valueForTrait` (and therefore less `NullPointerExceptions`).

## Example

Below can be found an example of a very simple server. It only exposes a `Switch is on` trait to the user, which is used to determine whether or not the server should send a `HIGH` or a `LOW` signal to the _Arduino_'s pin 5 (which would presumably connect to an LED).

```java
// #server "pin 5 switch"
public class Pin5Switch implements Server {

	private Configuration configuration;
	private Arduino arduino;

	public Pin5Switch(Configuration configuration, Arduino arduino) {
		this.configuration = configuration;
		this.arduino = arduino;
	}

	// #trait "Switch is on": false
	private Boolean switchIsOn() { return (Boolean) configuration.valueForTrait("Switch is on"); }

	public void processFrame(AudioBuffer buffer, FFT fft) {
		Integer pin5Value = (switchIsOn()) ? Arduino.HIGH : Arduino.LOW;
		arduino.digitalWrite(5, pin5Value);
	}
}
```

This example also shows that the server would increase its utility by exposing the pin number to the user as a trait.

---

| [← Documentation Overview](..) | [2. Project Overview →](2.%20Project%20Overview.md) |
| - | - |
