# Developing a Server

*Server*s are the classes of the server instances used during a light show's lifetime. They are provided in a single file written in the _Processing_ language. They can implement their logic any way they like, but by default can take advantage of [ddf's minim library](https://github.com/ddf/Minim).

## Requirements

1. None of the declared types in a server's file can have the same name as types declared in files in the _Program > Lightshow_ directory. At the time of writing those are `Configuration`, `Server`, `LiveLightshow_Default`, `LiveLightshow_LoudnessHistory` and `LiveLightshow_OnBeat`.  
Name collisions will stop the server from being importable by users. If is therefore recommended that type names are chosen in a way that reduces the likelihood of overlap with other servers' type names. For example, it would be better to call a type `AuthorName_Blink` instead of just `Blink`.

2. A server class has to conform to _Live Lightshow_'s `Server` interface, which requires implementing:
	* `void processChunk(AudioBuffer buffer, FFT fft)`
	* a constructor with the signature `(Configuration configuration, Arduino arduino)`. The constructor-requirement is not enforced by the compiler, but will lead to a runtime-crash if ignored.

3. A server has to tag itself with `// #server "<user-facing name>"` right above its class declaration. Omitting this tag will cause _Live Lightshow_ to ignore the server during static indexing, and therefore make it unusable for users. If the tag is not placed right above the class declaration, an error occurs during importing. The `<user-facing name>` is the default name, by which a user can refer to the server.

## Basic Implementation

The entry point for implementing a server is its `processChunk`-method. This method is called periodically with the `buffer` holding the audio-samples for the current chunk (typically 1024 samples), and the `fft` holding a Fourier-transformed version of the chunk. A server also has a reference to an `Arduino` object received during initialization. It can be used to make calls to the _Arduino_ via the [_Arduino_ for _Processing_ library](https://playground.arduino.cc/Interfacing/Processing/).  
Using these resources a server can use the information from `buffer` and `fft` to decide how to affect the _Arduino_.

## User-Facing Properties

Sometimes certain properties' values are hardcoded, and changing them would simply lead to different but equally valid behaviour of a server. In this case it is useful to expose such a property for the user to customize. User-facing properties of a server are called _traits_ and are declared with a special sytax inside the body of a server's class:

```java
// #trait "<user-facing trait name>": <default trait value>
```

The `<user-facing trait name>` is the name of the trait, as will be displayed to the user. The trait name also serves as the server-internal identifier for accessing the trait, using the instance's `configuration` object - which is passed via the required initializer. Hence, no two traits in a server can have the same name. They may also not contain the `:` and `"` characters.  
The `configuration` object is the interface between a server instance and its traits. All of the trait-declarations in a server are captured in a configuration file during _Live Lightshow_'s cataloguing process. Configuration files can then be accessed via `Configuration`'s `valueForTrait` method, which takes the `<user-facing trait name>` as argument to figure out which trait's value to return. The return type is just `Object` and needs to be cast to a trait-value's type individually. A trait-value's type is determined by the form of its `<default trait value>`. It can have the following types:

* `int` with default values like `0`, `42`, or `-10`
* `float` with default values like `0.0`, `3.14` or `-10.0`
* `bool`	with default values `true` or `false`
* `int-list` with default values like `[0, 42, -10]`, `[5]` or `i[]` for the empty int-list
*  `float-list` with default values like `[0.0, 3.14, -10.0]`, `[0.5]` or `f[]` for the empty float-list
* `bool-list` with default values like`[true, false, false]`, `[true]` or `b[]` for the emtpy bool-list

If a `<default trait value>` does not match any of these types, its trait will be ignored - which would in turn lead to a `NullPointerException` when requesting its value.  
The primitive types are returned as `Integer`, `Float` and `Boolean` and the list-types as `List<primitive type>` by `valueForTrait`.

### Implementation Pattern

Calling `configuration.valueForTrait("long identifier name")` and casting the result to the right type every time you want to use a user-facing property, can be quite a nuisance. It can therefore be useful to add methods for each trait, as follows:

```java
// #trait "Example Trait 1": [1, 2, 3]
private List<Integer> exampleTrait1() { return (List<Integer>) configuration.valueForTrait("Example Trait 1"); }

// #trait "Example Trait 2": b[]
private List<Boolean> exampleTrait2() { return (List<Boolean>) configuration.valueForTrait("Example Trait 2"); }
```

This way the call-site for `Example Trait 1` is simply `exampleTrait1()`, and its literal trait name only has to be used once. This leads to less typos in the name when calling `valueForTrait` (and therefore less `NullPointerException`s).

### User-Facing Information

Aside from configurable traits, a server can also declare an information-text viewable by the user via `lightshow server info`. To declare an info-text, place it between an `#info-begin` and `#info-end` tag. Omitting either tag will cause _Live Lightshow_ to assume that the info-text begins/ends and the beginning/end of the file respectively. Placing multiple info-tags of the same type will cause an error during importing.

## Testing Servers

During the course of developing a server, you probably want to test it within _Live Lightshow_ itself. If done manually, every change made to the server would require you to manually delete the previous version from _Live Lightshow's_ app directory and then import the new version.  
There is a much more comfortable way of going about this though:

1. Navigate to _Live Lightshow's_ _Program > Servers_ directory:

```bash
cd "$(lightshow directory)/Program/Servers"
```

2. Create a symbolic link to the file of the server being developed:

```bash
ln -s "path/of/server/being/developed" NewServer
```

3. When the server's traits are changed, rebuild the static catalogue:

```bash
lightshow rebuild-static-catalogue
```

Using this method, you can comfortably develop a server in any environment while still testing it with little effort.


## Example

Below can be found an example of a very simple server. It only exposes a `Switch is on` trait to the user, which is used to determine whether or not the server should send a `HIGH` or a `LOW` signal to the _Arduino_'s pin 5.  
A real server would probably not ignore `buffer` and/or `fft` completely, but this is just for demonstration:

```java
/* #info-begin
The 'pin 5 switch' server acts as a switch for the pin number 5 on your Arduino.
By using its "Switch Is On" trait, you can decide whether the pin should continuously be sent a HIGH or a LOW signal.
The trait defaults to a value of 'false' (implying a LOW signal).
#info-end */

// #server "pin-5-switch"
public class MarcusRossel_Pin5Switch implements Server {

   // Captures the arduino and configuration objects.
   private Configuration configuration;
   private Arduino arduino;

   // #trait "Switch Is On": false
   private Boolean switchIsOn() { return (Boolean) configuration.valueForTrait("Switch Is On"); }

   // Implements the initializer required for a Live Lightshow server.
   public MarcusRossel_Pin5Switch(Configuration configuration, Arduino arduino) {
      this.configuration = configuration;
      this.arduino = arduino;
   }

   // Writes the currently configured value for pin 5 to the Arduino.
   // This method is called about every 25ms by Live Lightshow.
   public void processChunk(AudioBuffer buffer, FFT fft) {
      Integer pin5Value = (switchIsOn()) ? Arduino.HIGH : Arduino.LOW;
      arduino.digitalWrite(5, pin5Value);
   }
}
```

This example also shows that the server would increase its utility by exposing the pin number to the user as a trait:

```java
// #trait "Output Pin": 5
private Integer outputPin() { return (Integer) configuration.valueForTrait("Output Pin"); }
```

If you need further examples, check out the [_on-beat_](../../Program/Servers/LiveLightshow_OnBeat.pde) server for an easy example and the [_default_](../../Program/Servers/LiveLightshow_Default.pde) server for a more involved example.

---

| [← 1. Preface](1.%20Preface.md) | [3. Project Overview →](3.%20Project%20Overview.md) |
| - | - |
