# Contributing

***Before reading this document, make sure you have read the documentation [preface](1.%20Preface). This guide is aimed at a legacy version of the project!***

---

This document aims at explaining how to contribute to _Live Lightshow_ (_alpha_) in order to lower the barrier for getting _your_ ideas implemented in the project.  

**Documentation:**
A great way to get become more familiar with the project is improving its documentation. It can be easy for deeply involved developers to gloss over important points when writing documentation - making it hard to understand for newcomers. So if you feel like you've had a hard time understanding any part of the docs, try yourself at writing a better version. You can always consult other contributors when unsure about anything.

**Tests:**
If you want to gain a deeper understanding of certain scripts, writing tests for them can help a great deal. Not only will this lead you to knowing their success and error paths, but it will also allow you to catch any regressions when implementing features in the future.  
The test-suite is currently very limited, so there are many opportunities to add new tests. Make sure to check out an existing test-scripts to see how they are structured and how they use the `testing.sh`-library.

**Starter Features:**
There are many small changes that could benefit the project, which are a great place to gain first development experience.  
Many of the user-facing messages and interactions could benefit from an overhaul. This can be done by updating the _Lookup Files/text-segements_ and scripts using the `text_for_` function.
Furthermore an uninstaller is currently completely lacking, and could be added to the _Installation_ directory, with a corresponding subcommand to `lightshow`.

**Intermediate Features:**
There is still a lot of low hanging fruit when it comes to _Live Lightshow_'s feature set. This includes features like:
* removing existing servers
* removing existing racks
* editing racks

**Advanced Features:**
A feature from which _Live Lightshow_ would greatly benefit is the ability to create racks from scratch. Also, the runtime-side of the project could be revamped to allow for dynamic server instance creation and destruction. This would enable features like dynamic rack-switching. 
It could also be useful to implement a mechanism by which servers can write back into their configuration files.
From a user's perspective it could be nice to add the notion of _visualizers_. Each type of server could implement their own visualizer. The user could then choose which server instance to visualize during runtime.

**Refactoring:**
If you feel very comfortable in adding and modifying the project's feature set, you might be interested in refactoring certain compnents. Over time projects tend to accumulate technical debt, so cleanup becomes necessary.  
Currently the responsibilities of the scripts in the _Catalogue_ directory are not clearly delinieated and would need some refactoring.

---

| [← 4. Program Lifecycle](4.%20Program%20Lifecycle.md) | [Documentation Overview →](..) |
| - | - |
