
# Getting Started

This guide contains a basic introduction on how to use _Live Lightshow_.
It will introduce its concepts and show you how to apply them in practice.

## Concepts

### Servers
_Live Lightshow_ is based around the concept of _servers_. A server is something that knows how to convert audio input into visual output - it can do so any way it likes.
For example you could have one server that specifically analyzes certain audio features that are associated with vocals, and produce its output from that. Or you could have a server which just produces output when the audio is louder than a certain threshold.  
In the context of _Live Lightshow_, servers will receive their audio input from your computer's selected audio input and generally produce output directed at an _Arduino_.

### Server Instances
Now when you run a light show, you can have any number of servers running at the same time. And specifically, you can have multiple servers of the same type running at once. Each one of these running servers is called and _instance_. So you can have as many _instances_ running as you want, where multiple instances can be of the same _server_ type. The reason you might want to run multiple instances of the same server, is that you can _configure_ instances differently.

### Server Traits
In order to allow you to customize your light show, servers can provide customizable _traits_. A trait is just some named value, which is used by a server in its audio visualization process.
So using the example of a server which just produces output if the audio's loudness is above a certain threshold: this server could provide a trait called _threshold_ whose value you can decide.
And while the _kinds_ of traits that you have access to are the same for each instance of a given server, the _values_ of those traits can be different for each instance.  
So for example, you could have two instances of said loudness-server running. Both instances would only provide the _threshold_ trait, but the first instance might give it a value of 10, while the second one gives it a value of 100.

### Trait Value Types
To make sure that you don't misinterpret what kind of value a trait expects, each trait value has a _type_.
Possible trait value types are:
* _Integer_
	* whole numbers like `0`, `42`, or `-10`
* _Float_
	* floating-point numbers like `0.0`, `3.14` or `-10.0`
* _Boolean_
	* the truth-values `true` or `false`
* _Integer-List_
	* a list of _Integer_ values like `[0, 42, -10]`, `[5]` or `i[]` for the empty _Integer-List_
*  _Float-List_
	* a list of _Float_ values like `[0.0, 3.14, -10.0]`, `[0.5]` or `f[]` for the empty _Float-List_
* _Boolean-List_
	* a list of _Boolean_ values like `[true, false, false]`, `[true]` or `b[]` for the empty _Boolean-List_

It should be noted that _Float_ values always require the decimal `.` even when specifying whole numbers like `10.0`. List values require the opening and closing brackets `[`, `]`. And _Boolean_ values need to be lowercase.
Leading and trailing whitespace around values is ignored.

## Using _Live Lightshow_

Now that you have an understanding of the concepts of _Live Lightshow_, lets look at how to use them in practice.

You can control a light show using the `lightshow` command. This command takes a couple of subcommands which allow you to do different things.

### `initialize`:
Before starting a light show, you might need to call:

```bash
lightshow initialize
```

This will load the required program onto your _Arduino_ and perform some cataloguing tasks.  
You will only ever need to call this command if you have loaded another program onto your _Arduino_ between uses of _Live Lightshow_.

### `start`:
Once initialized, you can start a light show by calling:

```bash
lightshow start
```
This command begins by prompting you in _vi_, to specify which server instances you want to run. You need to give each instance a unique name, and a valid server type.
The types of servers you can choose from will be those provided with this project, as well as those you have imported (see [Advanced Usage](Documentation/User/3.%20Advanced%20Usage.md) for more information about this).
So for example, to start a lightshow with three instances of the `default` server called `lows`, `mids` and `highs`, you would provide the following:

```bash
lows:  default
mids:  default
highs: default
```

Leading and trailing whitespace in given names is ignored. The `"` and `:` characters can not be used in instance names. Omitting the `:` between the instance name and server type will also lead to an error.

After providing a valid list of server instances, the light show will start feeding the audio signal of your computer's current audio line-in to the server instances.

### `live info`:
If you are unsure whether a light show is currently running, you can call:

```bash
lightshow live info
```

This will tell you whether a light show is currently running, as well as providing you with information about the instances of a running light show. The output for the light show started above would be something like:

```
A light show is currently running with the following setup:

Instance 'lows' of server type 'default'
• Lower Frequency Bound: 0.0
• Upper Frequency Bound: 20000.0
• History Interval: 2.0
• Trigger Threshold: 1.25
• Minimal Trigger Threshold: 0.3
• Output Pins: i[]
• Configuration Read Cycle: 5.0

Instance 'mids' of server type 'default'
• Lower Frequency Bound: 0.0
• Upper Frequency Bound: 20000.0
• History Interval: 2.0
• Trigger Threshold: 1.25
• Minimal Trigger Threshold: 0.3
• Output Pins: i[]
• Configuration Read Cycle: 5.0

Instance 'highs' of server type 'default'
• Lower Frequency Bound: 0.0
• Upper Frequency Bound: 20000.0
• History Interval: 2.0
• Trigger Threshold: 1.25
• Minimal Trigger Threshold: 0.3
• Output Pins: i[]
• Configuration Read Cycle: 5.0
```

The bulleted points beneath each instance are its traits. As you can see all of the instances currently have the same values for their traits. These values are default values provided by the developer of the server.  
The _Configuration Read Cycle_ is provided by _Live Lightshow_ though. It determines how often a server instance reads its configuration and hence how quickly it updates its behavior. Making this duration shorter will result in more load on your computer. Making it longer will cause a server instance to take longer to realize the changes you have made.

### `live configure`:
To configure the traits of a server instance, you call:

```bash
lightshow live configure <instance name>
```

This will open _vi_ with the configuration of the specified instance. You can then change the values of the specified traits. Deleting a trait will cause the server instance to use its default value. Specifying a trait with an invalid name or type, will cause the program to ask you to change it to a valid one.

Following the example above, we could reconfigure the `mids` instance to use different output pins:

```bash
lightshow live configure mids
```

This will open _vi_ with:

```bash
Lower Frequency Bound: 0.0
Upper Frequency Bound: 20000.0
History Interval: 2.0
Trigger Threshold: 1.25
Minimal Trigger Threshold: 0.3
Output Pins: i[]
Configuration Read Cycle: 5.0
```

We can then change the trait values to:

```bash
Lower Frequency Bound: 0.0
Upper Frequency Bound: 20000.0
History Interval: 2.0
Trigger Threshold: 1.25
Minimal Trigger Threshold: 0.3

Output Pins: [2, 3, 4]

Configuration Read Cycle: 5.0
```

Once you have reconfigured an instance's traits, it might take a moment for the change to manifest in the visual output.  

### `server list`:

To find out which types of servers are currently in your catalogue, call:

```bash
lightshow server list
```

This will display a list of your catalogued servers. For example, by default it will show:

```
The server catalogue contains the following servers:
• 'default'
• 'on-beat'
```


### `server info`:

If you are ever unsure about how a certain server works, you can call:

```bash
lightshow server info <server name>
```

This will display an information-text written by the developer of the server. It should explain the general functionality of the server, as well as all of its traits.

### `end`:

Ending a light show is as simple as calling:

```bash
lightshow end
```

Should _Live Lightshow_ not respond to this, you can also just close the program from your dock or task bar.

---

| [← 1. Terminal Basics](1.%20Terminal%20Basics.md) | [3. Advanced Usage →](3.%20Advanced%20Usage.md) |
| - | - |
