# Advanced Usage

This guide goes in to detail about how to use _Live Lightshow_ beyond a basic level.

## Racks

If you've run more than one light show, you will quickly notice that it becomes quite redundant to specify and configure the server instances anew each time. This problem is solved by _racks_.
A rack is a set of configured server instances. It basically captures all of the setup you do in order to run a light show.  
You can then specify a rack when starting a light show at some later time, to jump right into the configured state again.

### Creating a Rack

To save the setup of the currently running light show, simply call:

```bash
lightshow live save <rack name>
```

This will capture the state in a rack called `<rack name>`. If the rack name is already taken, you will be asked to provide a different one.

### Loading a Rack

You can use a saved rack with `lightshow start`, by calling:

```bash
lightshow start <rack name>
```

This will cause _Live Lightshow_ to skip over the instance-configuration prompt it normally presents, and instead run with the instances as given by the specified rack.

### Rack Information

To get information about the available racks, call:

```bash
lightshow rack list
```

This will print a list of the form:

```
The rack catalogue contains the following racks:

Rack 'rack 1'
 ∙ 'instance A': 'server a'
 ∙ 'instance B': 'server b'
 ∙ 'instance C': 'server c'

...
```

If you need information about the configuration of a specific rack, call:

```bash
lightshow rack info <rack name>
```

This will print a description like when calling `lightshow live info` - but for the specified rack.

## Custom Servers

A major feature of _Live Lightshow_ is the ability to use third party servers. A server is defined in a single file, and therefore can be shared easily.  
To import a new server into your own _Live Lightshow_ catalogue, call:

```bash
lightshow server import <server file path>
```

This will attempt to import the given server file, but may fail. There are multiple technical reasons why this can occur - but one that you can resolve yourself is a name-collision.  
If the name of the server, defined in the given file, collides with one of the server names already used in your _Live Lightshow_ catalogue, it can not be imported. You can fix this issue by providing a different name for the server, after the file path:

```bash
lightshow server import <server file path> <custom server name>
```

Server importing can not be performed while a light show is running.

---

| [← 2. Getting Started](2.%20Getting%20Started.md) | [4. Setup Example →](4.%20Setup%20Example.md) |
| - | - |